# Spark Data Lake ETL Project - Sparkify

## Introduction
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, we are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

We'll be able to test our database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to we by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare our results with their expected results.

#### Project Description
In this project, we'll apply what we've learned on Spark and data lakes to build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. To complete the project, we will need to load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3. We'll deploy this Spark process on a cluster using AWS.

## Project Datasets
There are two datasets that reside in S3:

    Song data: s3a://udacity-dend/song_data
    Log data: s3a://udacity-dend/log_data

### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

    song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
    song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
  And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

    {"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset we'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

    log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
    log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json


## Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and log datasets, we'll create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

### Fact Table
- songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
  - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables
- users - users in the app
  - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
- songs - songs in music database
  - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
- artists - artists in music database
  - artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
- time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
  - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday


### Project Structure

2. **etl.py** reads and processes files in the S3 bucket (song_data and log_data), loads them into the staging area, and then into the dimensional tables for analysis.
4. **README.md** provides a detailed discussion of the project.
5. **dl.cfg** config file used to contain AWS credentials (credentials not included).

## Project Steps
Below are steps we follow to complete each component of this project.

### Create Table Schemas
1. Design schemas for fact and dimension tables
2. Write a SQL CREATE statement for each of these tables in sql_queries.py
5. Launch a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3.
7. Test by running create_tables.py and checking the table schemas in the redshift database.

### ETL Pipeline
1. Read data from Sparkify S3 bucket (song and log data)
2. Process data using Spark (transforms them into fact and dimension tables)
3. Load data back into S3 as partitioned parquet files. Each folder in the bucket populated by its respective table.
4. Test by running etl.py and checking the s3 bucket folders.
